trait the basic system of barter an
exchange that you have to do really
carefully or you'll end up with Dwight
Howard Syria seriously parents talk to
your children about trade you don't want
to go to school with Peter Lunchables
and coming home with Dwight Howard the
baby's gonna add a three-point shot to
his game now kids grow up no trade trade
is a subject on which our current
president considers himself particularly
expert trade that's what I'm gonna do so
good I'll take those traders and make
them so good that's what I do
I love taking bad deals and making them
good I love trade you know trades always
been my thing I could name ten different
forms of trade I know every one of them
hey the Wharton School of Finance right
here yeah I can name ten forms of trade
there's a free trade fair trade Rough
Trade Trader Joe's that's what eight
then there's human trafficking that's
like trading for people well rounded up
and call it ten Wharton School of
Finance Roy here Thomas talked a big
game on trade for decades and he spent
this year slapping tariffs on products
from China Canada the EU and others
prompting them to retaliate with tariffs
of their own and this trade war has
escalated fast from tariffs on just 18
products at the start of the year to now
over 10,000 so things have gotten pretty
serious and American workers are already
being impacted particularly in
agriculture we're feeling a lot of pain
right now in in the farm sector it's
affecting farmers a negative way I
always hope that one morning president
Trump's just going to wake up and and
send out that 3:30 in the morning tweet
that says tariffs are gone wow that is a
depressing thought so that guy's
livelihood depends on a tweet that says
tariffs are gone and even if Trump does
end up doing that at 3:30 in the morning
you just know it'll say tariffs a goon
and we'll all have to decide what he
meant by that so tonight before things
get much worse let's take a look at this
trade war because it's tempting to think
that Trump has a plan after all trade is
his thing and he's tweeted trade wars
are good and easy to win but for years
his strategy on that seems to have been
based around little more than tone of
voice so easy I drop a 25% tax on China
and
and you know I said to somebody that is
really the messenger the messenger is
important I could have one man say we're
gonna tax you 25% and I could say
another listen your we're
gonna tax you 25% oh I see okay so the
tone is important so if I were to say to
somebody that's not how trade
negotiations work that would be one
thing but if I were to say that's not
how trade negotiations work you're dumb
that would be much more
effective there are some very basic
things about economics that he seems
genuinely confused by take tariffs Trump
wants tweeted that if the trade war
doesn't end other countries will pay us
vast sums of money in the form of
tariffs we win either way but that's not
how tariffs work tariffs are taxes
designed to make foreign goods more
expensive therefore making domestic
products more appealing other countries
don't pay us tariffs importers here too
when they receive the goods and they
usually pass that cost along to the
consumer so when Trump imposes a tariff
on an item you are probably going to pay
more for it as reporters have been
trying to explain in the most literal
way possible here in the kitchen
made in China utensils and appliances
like stoves and refrigerators are being
targeted upstairs in the bathroom
everyday items like shampoo nail
clippers makeup and towels could mean
higher prices for things like instant
coffee and this harley-davidson
motorcycle everyday items like the iPad
could be hid the tablet has a chip from
Intel which could be a target East
Cooter's have taken off this year now
they face a 25% tariff okay I hate to
admit this but if one of the key
casualties of this trade war is e
scooters I actually think I'm fine with
that
well basically is Dane Cook somehow
became transportation
and it's not it's not just tariffs that
Trump seems to misunderstand there's
also our trades deficits basically the
number that expresses how much more we
buy from other countries than they buy
from us Trump talks about it all the
time usually like this our trade deficit
ballooned to 817 billion dollars think
of that we lost 817 billion dollars a
year over the last number of years in
trade in other words if we didn't trade
we'd save a hell of a lot of money okay
okay so there's a lot to unpack there
first our trade deficit is actually 552
billion so he was off by a quarter
trillion dollars water school of finance
right there a second trade deficit
aren't actually always bad and many
economists believe for very complex
reasons involving savings rates and the
dollar special status as the world's
reserve currency that America's trade
balance might be more or less where it
should be and finally and this is
important when we have a trade deficit
we don't lose money it's not a big pile
of cash that we handed over we bought
things that we received and I'm not
saying that it was all valuable does
anyone really need the pony up daddy
saddle which allows your child to
symbolize their newfound dominance over
your life no I didn't need it but I
wanted it and honestly it's brought my
dad and me closer together even the
world leaders that Trump has been
fighting with seem alarmed by how little
he understands trade EU Chief
jean-claude juncker reportedly met Trump
armed with a series of colorful simple
flashcards to explain the trade war and
the work that really gets me there is
colorful because that means that means
that they have some simple flashcards
and thought no too wonky let's get some
big fun baby colors on those things
let's give him a chance and Angela
Merkel struggled to explain something
even more basic the independent
newspaper setting an unnamed senior
German official ten times Trump asked ms
merkel if he could negotiate a trade
deal with Germany every time she replied
you can't do a trade deal with Germany
only the
on the 11th refusal Trump finally got
the message Oh we'll do a deal with
Europe then so he understood but only
after the 11th refusal just listen to
what that sounds like
deal with Europe ha deal with your ha
deal with your ha deal with York ha deal
with your ha
deal with your car deal with your car
[Applause]
deal with your honestly I'm just amazed
that after the fifth time Angela Merkel
didn't turn to our translator and say
okay you're fired you can't
possibly be translating this right I'm
not I am not saying that it's easy to
understand trade it's one of the most
complicated issues there is technically
politically and emotionally over the
years free trade has been criticized
from all sides and people argue that
unfettered trade can reward the worst
behavior of multinational companies and
exploit countries with fewer protections
for labor and that has unquestionably
happened but Trump generally confines
himself to arguing that trade is
responsible for the death of US
manufacturing jobs and while there is
some truth in that automation is the far
bigger culprit we actually still make a
lot of things in America US factories
now manufacture twice as much as they
did in 1984 but they do it with 1/3
fewer workers and the overwhelming
consensus among economists is that trade
between countries generally speaking can
create jobs lower costs and be a net
benefit to both nations essentially
think of trade like sex if you're doing
it right it can be good for both
partners though the odds of that
happening plummet as soon as Donald
Trump gets involved and the problem the
real problem with Trump not
understanding trade is that he therefore
doesn't understand its consequences for
instance one of the first major shots he
fired in this trade war was putting
tariffs on steel and aluminum that was
great news for the people working in
those specific industries like this
worker in a Missouri aluminum plant you
you think that his policies are kind of
why you have a job today I know what is
you know it is yeah I want to have a job
offer if it didn't happen wish I could
meet him and give him big old hug
you know yeah I do know and I honestly
get why he wants to hug him Trump got
him his job back is one of two possible
explanations for that man wanting to hug
Donald Trump but the other of course
being that if during the early stages of
the campaign Trump and Melania were
driving through Missouri on a stormy
night and their car broke down Donald's
not getting out some Melania ends up
climbing out into the rain and opening
the hood as that aluminum worker comes
driving down the highway he rolls down
his window and asks if he can help to
which Melania gratefully asked maybe a
flashlight and just if the aluminum
worker is handing the flashlight over it
gets struck by lightning and they switch
bodies
so now Donald is living in the White
House with an aluminum worker who feels
understandably weird about holding his
hat while Melania is forced to point
after her husband from the factory floor
her heart's aching for him every second
of every day knowing full well that
revealing her true identity would just
complicate things for everyone but
that's Melania you go to him
the world will accept your love that
aluminum worker clearly isn't in love
with him everyone can see it and its
players so much
but that individual guy in that
individual job things have improved but
when it comes to trade nothing happens
in isolation and then there are
downstream effects to those tariffs not
too far from where that guy works there
is an eighth nail factory which suffered
because thanks to Trump steel tariffs
the price of their raw material steel
skyrocketed sales dropped in half and
they've laid off over a hundred workers
and those that remain are worried some
of these people this is the only ink of
their guide just like me this is the
only thing inked up I got and I got to
put another daughter through school you
know it's very hard yeah it is that's
the problem here protecting steel help
steel but it hurts anything made from it
and you have to balance those
consequences by one estimate Trump's
tariffs may create 26,000 jobs in steel
and aluminum but could cost over 400,000
jobs across the rest of the economy so
if trump's trying to create jobs almost
anything would be a better idea than
tariffs he'd be better off dressing a
turtle up like david bowie and throwing
him into a pool full of milk will that
create jobs of course not but it won't
actively lose hundreds of thousands of
them plus it'll be the highlight of
ziggy she'll dusts life and listen
listen we're still only scratching the
surface of how complicated this is
because distinguishing between a foreign
product and an american job can be a lot
trickier than you'd think
take some of trumps favorite villains
when it comes to foreign companies they
sell mercedes and BMW and the cars come
in by the millions and we hardly tax
them at all we can't do this stuff
anymore
we protect Germany Germany who doesn't
have a BMW we're gonna tax Mercedes Benz
we're gonna tax BMW we're gonna tax all
of those beautiful Mercedes Benzes that
are coming in at wicked attacks BMWs
that are coming in Trump is furious with
German cars and here is here's the thing
about that in the clip where he said who
doesn't have a BMW to the crowd in his
classic man-of-the-people way so trunk
is actually in North Augusta
South Carolina and just two hours drive
away is a place called Spartanburg
County
well known for this Spartanburg is home
to the largest BMW plant in the world
last year they made more than 370
thousand luxury SUVs employing 10,000
people pumping billions into the state's
economy yeah it seems Trump didn't know
that look everyone knows he doesn't know
a lot of things but occasionally it's
important to remember that he also
doesn't know anything it's true it's
true I'll show you
everyone close your eyes right now and
think of something that thing you're
thinking of he doesn't know that and
since the trade war began Spartanburg
County is actually double because
they'll be affected by higher costs for
the steel that they use to build the
cars and when they try to ship them to
China
they'll be hit by Chinese tariffs so
they are in complicated trouble or as
Trump might put it listen your
you get in tax twice so so
if a trade war could be this disruptive
and the net benefits are likely to be
this negative why is Trump doing this
especially because members of his own
economic team seem against it Gary Cohn
reportedly left over the proposed
tariffs and Steve minuchin Treasury
secretary and white hot sex bomb has has
tried to do some damage control by
claiming we're not actually in a trade
war at all this has been a trade dispute
all along it never was a trade war it's
a trade dispute oh I get it it's not a
war it's a dispute you know what I
always almost bought that
because I'm so distracted by this
lavaridge sex volcanoes looks the guy's
hypnotic I must have a bad case of the
Manucci 'he's right now because he's
looking like an absolute snack so so who
is who is telling the president that
this is a good idea well by most
accounts the driving force is Peter
Navarro head of the Office of Trade and
manufacturing policy
he's Trump's trade guy isn't that right
Peter I'm the trade guy thanks Peter
so so just just for the record let's all
get our Trump administration role
straight we've got trade guy Lyle ad
nothing boy Jesus please a word ghoul
crime nymph drunk grandpa and daughter
wife it's a it's a well-oiled machine
he's running
now Navarro is the author of a series of
get rich investment books and like Trump
he's obsessed with trade deficits in
general and China in particular saying
trade with China is a zero-sum game
meaning one country can only win if the
other country loses and it is hard to
overstate just how rare his views are
among economists when the New Yorker
profiled him they asked a Varro to help
them find even one colleague who agreed
with him he gave them two names one was
Peter Murray see a University of
Maryland professor who said of Navarro
he has a rather severe position that
zero-sum statement I have a problem with
that
where's his proof and the other was a
blogger named Allen Tolson who Navarro
described as a fine economist to which
Thomson replied I do not hold an
economics degree and I'm guessing
Thomson also doesn't hold a degree in
web design because this is the photo on
the about page of his blog so if you are
understandably wondering at this point
then how on earth did Navarro get a job
at the White House well it is
way dumber than you are thinking
apparently Jared Kushner was tasked with
finding Trump experts on Chinese trade
and this is how he went about it so
Jared went on Amazon
he fired up his computer and he found
some of Peter Navarro's books and he
asked him to come to the White House
that's how Peter Navarro ended up in the
White House yeah Jared looked for
experts on Amazon that was his rigorous
process so when Jeff Sessions does get
fired be prepared for him to be replaced
by crystal kaswell author of the erotic
fiction novel dangerous rock a dangerous
noise novel because for whatever reason
that is honestly the first thing that
came up when we typed good law person
parentheses smart into a bizarre
now the Navarro book that Jarrett found
was called death by China and it paints
the u.s. Chinese trade relationship in
apocalyptic terms because while there
are some legitimate complaints about
China's unfair practices they've
deliberately depressed their currency
they violate intellectual property
rights and arguably skirts WTO rules
this book goes way further with chapter
titles featuring phrases like
shanghaiing the gene pool and look mark
there's a death star pointing at Chicago
and Navarro actually turned the book
into a movie that one critic called the
documentary equivalent of a raving
street corner derelict which seems harsh
until you see how the movie begins the
film you're about to she addresses one
of the most urgent problems facing
America
it's increasingly destructive trade
relationship with a rapidly rising China
it starts like that it's warm up is a
literal knife being stabbed into the
heart of America and if you are worried
that that leaves it with nowhere to go
please don't be concerned because there
are even less subtle animations to come
which depict China's trade practices as
guns and bombs that blow up American
factories and stunningly deceptive
moments like this China has stolen
thousands of our factories and millions
of our jobs multinational corporation
profits are soaring and we now all over
three trillion dollars to the world's
largest communist nation I'm not saying
that that large ball isn't very
convincing but our trade deficit isn't
the same as what we owe to China those
are two different numbers and neither of
them is anywhere close to three trillion
dollars and when something that central
to your movie has something that wrong
with it
you usually have to replace it with
Christopher Plummer so so so Navarro is
not someone who any legitimate
economists take seriously and yet he
seems to be the only person the
president is listening to Trump has
called death by China right on and
lauded its facts figures and insight and
Navarro returns the compliment saying of
his own job that my function really as
an economist is to try and provide the
underlying analytics that confirmed
Trump's intuition and his intuition is
always right and that is simply
terrifying because the economists
shouldn't be finding ways to confirm the
intuitions of someone who doesn't know
what they're talking about it's like a
builder working for a child saying my
job is to build this house he designed
which is shaped like an ice-cream cone
with a window that's also a door and the
size of the Sun and a dog his intuitions
are always right no they aren't you need
to stop that child before someone gets
hurt
in fact if you want to get a sense of
just how little Navarro understands the
game he's playing consider this since
this trade war began
China has imposed 37 billion dollars of
tariffs on the u.s. now take a look at
what Navarro said back in March
are you expecting China to come back
with retaliation I don't believe any
country in the world is going to
retaliate for the simple reason that we
are the most lucrative and biggest
market in the world they know they're
cheating us and all we're doing is
standing up for herself it's just
breathtaking to see someone be that
confident and that wrong he's basically
Leonardo DiCaprio in Titanic yelling I'm
king of the world except you're not are
you leo you're just an amateur sketch
artist who's about to be murdered by ice
when you put all of this together what
you're left with is this we're engaged
in an escalating trade war that almost
no legitimate economist supports led by
a man who honestly doesn't seem to fully
understand the mechanics of what he's
doing getting advice from the human
equivalent of an all-caps email from
your uncle and the crazy thing is the
effect of all this is the exact opposite
of what Trump says he wants because if
you want to create jobs you don't do
that by cutting off American companies
markets and suppliers and if you want to
curb the abuses of countries like China
you don't do that by pissing off the
leaders of every other nation on earth
and I know that none of what I'm saying
right now will get through to trump so
so maybe it's time to take a page from
one of the only people he's actually
listening to and give him some basic
economic lessons in the only language he
seems to understand the film you're
about to see addresses one of the most
urgent problems facing America the
destruction of basic economic knowledge
by stupidity and the consequences of it
could be disastrous so let's review a
few fundamental facts first a trade
deficit isn't a giant pool of money that
you've lost to another country that's
idiotic
second if you think you can use tariffs
as a weapon you should understand a
tariff isn't something other countries
pay you it's a tax you're forcing your
own people to pay which might end up
hurting them a lot less than it hurts
you
and third our economy is massively
interconnected and you can't just tamper
with one thing without considering what
the water consequences could be
unfortunately misunderstandings just
keep getting bigger while basic
knowledge is shrinking and the result is
stupidity is increasing at an
unsustainable rate listen economics is
incredibly complicated and at the very
least you'll probably shouldn't find
your key economic adviser on
Amazon and the trade guy because his
could end up seriously hurting
us
[Music]
[Applause]